---
title: "Possible agenda of the Coronavirus"
description: "An essay on the current pandemic"
---

The first thing to establish is that the US government (and governments in general) often take advantage of crises in order to push an agenda that otherwise would have had no justification. There are even cases of MANUFACTURED crises. This is easily seen in foreign policy, most notably in the Gulf of Tonkin incident where the US government claimed that the Northern Vietnamese military opened fire on the USS Maddox. In reality, absolutely nothing happened, as admitted by the US Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara. But, because of that, the US passed the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, allowing the US to enter the Vietnamese conflict without a formal declaration of war (that required Congressional approval). It was later repealed in 1971, but quickly replaced by the War Powers Act in 1973 that performed a similar role, giving presidents the ability to invade (enter into conflicts if you prefer) without Congressional assent, being used in Syria, the Balkans, Iraq and various other conflicts. A more recent incident was in 2003 when the US government lied about the presence of WMDs in Afghanistan, leading to a war that killed thousands of American soldiers, tens of thousands of Afghani citizens, and wasted trillions of dollars ("defense" companies profiting). This may be of no surprise to you, but this is a primer to establish that authorities are very much willing to lie to its citizens to get what they want.

  The second thing to establish is that the US government not only pursues Machiavellian and immoral policies abroad, but also domestically. In the 20th century the US government performed multiple chemical, biological, and psychological warfare on its citizens without their consent or knowledge. IN 1950, a US navy ship sprayed a cloud of microbes into the air to test how a biological weapons attack would affect the 800,000 citizens of SF. Perhaps it is tangentially related to a group called the Manhattan-Rochester Coalition who under a military contract from 195-1954 and 1963-1965 sprayed radioactive particles on the low-income and minority communities of St. Louis to again test its effects on unsuspecting populations. Unsurprisingly many years later there were cases of families contracting cancers, many of them dying at young ages such as in the case of Dons Spates in which 4 of her 11 siblings died of cancers, herself contracting cervical cancer. Finally, we come to MKULTRA, (which continued to operate under other names after MKULTRA was stopped) that studied the psychological effects of psychedelics on people. In warehouses in SF and NYC, the CIA kidnapped people, using prostitutes to lure people into places where they would be drugged, then tortured, being put into sensory deprivation tanks, electrically shocked, and verbally and sexually abused. This project required the collaboration between academics, and their respective universities, hospitals, prisons and pharmaceutical companies. The second point is now established... that the US government (and institutions) has a history of knowingly subjecting its citizens to harm without justification beyond the pursuit of "knowledge" and "science". This is not to say that the current crisis is some sort of cruel experiment, but that they have a history of LYING to pursue their agenda.

  The third thing that has to be explored before speaking of the current crises is the public political and legislative progression of America, specifically on civil liberties and surveillance. Spying and intelligence has always been a part of functions of any ruling faction, but only recently does surveillance reach the scale that it does today that allows governments to track your every move, internet search, calls, texts, and habits. Of course it was inevitable that we were going to end up at this point with technology advancement, but it only required the right excuse for the representatives in the government to give the go-ahead for intelligence agencies to use the latest technologies to access to our private lives. The 21st century started with 9/11, spawning the US Patriot Act, the creation of the TSA, and the invasion of Iraq (ironically Al-Qaeda was funded by the CIA in Operation Cyclone, so in a sense this was a crisis we partially funded). This crisis allowed the US government to pursue both domestic and foreign policy that would further their agenda. Generally, if there is a crisis and people are in fear, they turn to their governments for action, whether those threats are external, such as in the case of 9/11 with terrorists, or internal such as in the case of the Red Scare with communists. Similarly, if people are poor and needy they will seek assistance from the government because they are most equipped to help them. However, any government program and policy that enlarges the bureaucracy rarely if ever is retracted, regardless of how much time has passed and regardless of its effectiveness (or ineffectiveness).  After 20 years of operation, the TSA is still patting down grandmothers despite catching a grand total of 0 terrorists, and the Patriot Act is still in effect, being further strengthened in May 13 when Senate passed an amendment that allows FBI and CIA the power at a citizens browser history without a warrant. What is the agenda? Absolute and complete control. This can only be achieved if they have eyes on you at all times.

  So what about the coronavirus? It is a crisis like the others that I have already mentioned, and just like the others, the bigger of a crisis it is made out to be in the eyes of the public the more justification there is to pursue unprecedented policy and action that would seek to address it, conveniently aligning with the interests of those who want to control the American people. I propose 3 major reasons they want to inflate the # of cases and deaths.

1. Political - More justification to pass legislation to chip away at civil liberties in pursuit of control and surveillance
2. Financial - Funnel wealth to the rich like in the 08' crisis by crippling small businesses. Possible financial interests from Pharma.
3. Cultural/Spiritual - Isolate people, and make them fear seeing family and friends. Prevent them from going to church again out of fear.

Not everyone is on board, and you can see that in many individuals and even local governments that defy lockdown orders. But the general direction the authorities want to push is a society that looks very much like the one described by Brave New World, in which technology is used to control every level of society through a complete dependence on the government for every necessity. By making people dependent on government goods and services, they can then deny those necessities to those deemed undesirable, and only by mass surveillance is the state able to detect those undesirables.  

  1. The next step in surveillance is biometrics. This data was already being tracked by companies like 23andme, and basically any smartwatch company, but at least those were voluntary. By requiring measurement of your heartbeat, temperature, vaccination and medical history before entering any establishment/building to prove that you are "healthy", this would accomplish their goal of increasing surveillance and control of our lives in all aspects. If you do not have a certain vaccine or health parameters, you cannot work, granting another form of control and effectively cutting you off from any way of providing for yourself. Additionally, there may already be mounting efforts to use the current surveillance capabilities to prevent people from meeting in large groups, and in general tracking where people have traveled (requiring collaboration between telecommunication companies and authorities which is already very common). There is no doubt in my mind that even after this crisis is over, these sorts of measures won't go away. It will be like the continuation of the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution in 1964, or the Patriot Act of 2001. The more of a threat the virus is perceived to be, the less pushback authorities will get when they implement such policies.

2. There is an incentive to make the average American poorer and poorer so that socialist policies can be ushered in. Though there is nothing inherently wrong with social programs, I am suspicious of what leverage those providing those programs gain once people become dependent on them. Again, the goal is control, and just like how a father can control his son by threatening to stop financially supporting him, a government too can begin to use their dole as a way to control the populace. Of course, there is likely financial interest in enriching the 1%, and from pharmaceutical companies racing to produce a vaccine. Already, American billionaires have gained almost $500 billion from mid-March to mid-May while 30 million American lose their jobs, and those who have kept their jobs are working at diminished capacity. The more the number of cases and deaths are inflated, the longer the lockdown can be held, and the more poverty can be created. The more poor there are, the more people are willing to call for such things as socialized medicine, UBI, etc.

  3. Finally, we have to understand that we do not wrestle "against flesh and blood, but against the rulers, against the authorities, against the powers of this dark world and against the spiritual forces of evil in the heavenly realms." (Eph 6:12).  Besides impoverishing people, the first thing the lockdown does to people is that it affects their mental and spiritual life, almost always negatively. It isolates people from their loved ones, and prevents people from doing their favorite activities. Thus, the rate of domestic abuse, suicide, and presumably drug abuse and alcoholism has shot up. The perception of this virus, and the actions taken in response to that virus will lead many to sin, and even death. There is financial interest in creating depression, anxiety, and other disorders (more people to drug for Big Pharma), but on a more profound and subtle level, I believe there are people and spirits that feed off of the misery created by this pandemic. Finally, although America remains the most Christian Western nation in the world, this is quickly changing for the worse, and will accelerate if people do not attend church. This cultural change that the virus has will be dependent on the level of threat that people perceive it to be. If people get used to attending virtual church, and see it as too much of a threat to attend church in-person they will simply continue to avoid attending in real life, but this is a poor replacement, and in my estimation will decrease the rate at which people practice their faith in general. I do not claim to know the hearts of all Christians in America, and though church attendance does not mean you are more or less faithful, it is not hard for me to see that less church attendance would lead to less faith overall. Naturally, something always fills the vacuum, and people will begin to place more faith in the authorities of this world than the heavenly authority of Christ.

  TLDR: There is and have been liars in the American government who transcend party lines. These liars work with corporations, media, and universities to achieve what they believe to be the "best" for the American people (and on some level the whole world) but on its own twisted, tyrannical, and fundamentally immoral terms. This virus is no exception to the way in which they respond to crises (sometimes after creating them), which is to create as much fear as possible then offer a “solution”.
