---
title: "Sterility"
description: "A rant on sterility"
date: 2021-11-28

---

Sterility is masturbation done in favor of real sex. It is the solipsistic journey into the world of online porn and fantasies where there is infinite pleasure and none of the responsibilities that typically come with it. Why have sex and go through all that courtship, those stupid rituals, spend all that money, and after all that... face the risk of rejection when you can just jack off in your room? Better yet, don the VR headset and the onahole and really IMMERSE yourself in it. Have sex with countless women of innumerable variety as much as you want and at no cost. No babies. No STDs. And just wait for the sexbots. They'll  generate body heat with hyper realistic facial movements, talk in the the sweetest most feminine voice, have the biggest breasts and most voluptuous hips. All of it will be catered to your desire and YOUR fetishes because ultimately what is more important than your pleasure?

Sterility is the person who, when their daughter, gets sick, quarantines their only child out of fear for their own lives. When, upon hearkng that she is crying to be hugged and embraced by her mother, they ignore her and forced her to stay in her room, masked and alone. The weeping of the child haunts the mother but alas the priority is to stop the spread and avoid the illness yourself. The daughter, upon visiting their grandparents will not be allowed to hug or kiss them. Perhaps, if they are lucky will be able to visit them, but only in a protected and responsible manner behind a plastic covering and with both parties masking. Sterile sterile sterile.

Sterility is the gradual phasing out of any of the interactions we have with people in the name of "efficiency" and "automation". Instead of talking to a real person, talk to an automated voice and press some numbers into the phone. Perhaps you'll even have the pleasure of answering an automated voice, but there's no guarantee it'll be able to recognize your voice properly. Souless empty and hollow.

They say we live in a time of unprecedented interconnectedness of loving across borders and yet why are so many lonely, depressed and suicidal. Why does it seem like those least on the world wide web are those who are the most healthy and vital? What false communion, what lies are we feeding to ourselves to delude ourselves to thinking any of this is good let alone getting better? We crave love. We crave it to nourish the soul, to breathe life into us. Of course human interaction and love is messy because humans are inherently flawed and hence messy. Have you ever left a garden untended after sowing countless seeds in the ground? It is chaotic but the life that shoots forth from the ground, how beautiful it is! Such beauty and vitality is an image of our own human relations and it's complexities.

But this is what brings forth fruit and the jewels of the earth. If we continue down this path in which all human interactions from the sexual to even the simple gestures of greeting someone through hugs and handshakes are completely eliminated in order to eliminate risk of contagion so will we destroy the very means by which we give and receive love, or at the very least greatly diminish it. Love must be expressed in concrete, physical, and visible means. Handshakes, hugs, kisses, all these are ways of expressing the profound idea that you and I are in one way shape or form, "one". Eliminating then or putting barriers in the way is an impediment to this love and communion, preventing such love from flourishing. What greater love can a person give to another person by taking the risk of their own life to express his love for the other?  The risk of coldness and sterility on one hand and the risk of disease and negative consequence on the other. I will always choose life and love. So be it. So be it. 
