---
title: "The Radical Transformation of Food and Chronic Illness"
description: "An essay on how America transformed food and its links to the current epidemic of chronic illness"
date: 2022-05-30
image:
        feature: headers/heart_attack.jpg

---

I have written previously ([On Pharmaceutical and Medical Malfeasance](seraphimofbrooklyn.github.io/posts/) and [Science As a Form of Storytelling](seraphimofbrooklyn.github.io/posts/)) on the phenomena of chronic illness being a particularly acute problem in the West, and especially America.   Of the most pertinent in this category of illness includes obesity, type 2 diabetes, heart disease, and a host of auto-immune diseases. The main purpose of this essay is to illustrate the line of thought that contends that the pharmaceutical, medical, and food industry have much more financial interest in prolonging illness than curing it. Secondly, I would like to outline the illnesses deemed "incurable" in the eyes of modern medicine that are being reversed or completely cured by small pockets of scientists/doctors and scientific/medical laymen.

### Insulin and Type 2 Diabetes

The typical progression for anyone who is prescribed exogenous insulin for type 2 diabetes is the following; insulin does its job of keeping blood sugar down in the bloodstream, after a certain time the body adjusts to the new levels of insulin and can no longer maintain homeostasis in regards to blood sugar, doctor prescribes a higher dose of insulin, repeat. All the while, the patient is getting fatter and fatter, even while maintaining a caloric deficit. What is happening?

Firstly, the nature of insulin must be explained. It is the main hormone that works antagonistically to a lesser known hormone called glucagon. When blood sugar is high, insulin is released, and when blood sugar is low glucagon is released. The mechanism by which insulin operates is to store excess blood sugar in the body, primarily in adipose tissue (but also in muscle tissue). When blood sugar is low, glucagon is released and works inversely to insulin by pulling energy out of the body's storage.

Secondly, there are two main terms you must know Hyperinsulinemia and hyperglycemia. The former simply refers to a condition in which there is too much insulin in someone's body, and the latter refers to the condition in which there is too much sugar in the body. These two are intimately connected. When there is too much sugar entering the body (through diet primarily), the body naturally produces insulin from the pancreas to suppress blood sugar levels. After a certain point however, the amount of insulin the body can naturally produce is insufficient to "pack" the blood sugar into muscle cells, pancreas, and adipose tissues. Despite the "insufficiency" of the amount of insulin, there are still elevated levels of insulin in the body which of course is the definition of Hyperinsulinemia.

Why is hyperinsulinemia bad? (Explain more in detail) It is bad because it causes people to get fat, and excess fat is associated with all forms of negative health outcomes. The addition of exogenous insulin into the body usually prescribed to type 2 diabetics, only makes this condition WORSE. It solves the immediate problem (lowering blood sugar) but actually exacerbates hyperinsulinemia. The so called standard medical treatment if taken to its natural end only ends in progressively worsening forms of hyperinsulinemia and dependence on exogenous insulin which ends up costing the average patient hundreds if not thousands of dollars a month.

Dr. Jason Fung, and Dr. Peter Attia are two major figures of note who are in their own clinical settings helping people change their lives by reversing their type 2 diabetes. They do so by a "simple trick" : fasting. Dr. Attia once received a call from a man who's son was about to lose his foot due to diabetes leaving his outer extremities so utterly filled with SUGAR it was rotting due to bacteria. The doctors were considering amputating the foot to avoid infection of the entire body. The man was told that his son would need to completely abstain from food for one week, and even then there wouldn't be any promises because his condition was very advanced. The man was apparently Orthodox and was familiar to the concept of fasting so he was comfortable with this idea. After fasting for a week or so, the son's foot was saved. I am not sure what happened afterwards as I am quoting all this from memory.

How does fasting address the issue of hyperinsulinemia and hyperglycemia? The main issue with type 2 diabetes, and of Western approach to medicine in general is that the symptoms are addressed while ignoring the source of the issue itself. The issue (in case you haven't realized) is that hyperglycemia causes hyperinsulinemia, and hyperglycemia is caused by excess sugar consumption. So solve excess sugar consumption and you've solved hyperglycemia and by proxy hyperinsulinemia. Of course, no one wants to be told "Stop eating sugar fatty", and few people have the willpower to deny themselves sugary food after decades of being conditions to eat all manners of food that are artificially sweetened. Most would rather just take the insulin shot and change nothing about their lifestyle, and of course like good citizens.. listen to their doctor.

Alternatively, like Dr. Fung and Dr. Atilla, prescribe intermittent fasting, or a complete fast for short periods of time (a day to several days), or a ketogenic diet, all of which accomplish the same thing which is to lower sugar consumption. IN the case of fasting, the body doesn't consume anything at all, and in the case of a ketogenic diet the body consumes extremely low levels of carbohydrate (ie sugar). In these prescribed lifestyles, the body is alleviated from high levels of sugar in the bloodstream, and instead enters a ketogenic state (after 16 or so hours into a fast), and through glucagon production also enters a catabolic state, hence this lifestyle can also double as a technique to lose weight. A ketogenic state just means that the body switches to using ketones as its main source of fuel rather than the typical carbohydrate.

### Myopia and the Glasses industry
EndMyopia
