---
title: "Western and Eastern Theories of Salvation"
description: "A comparison of salvation as interpreted by the Western Churches and Eastern Orthodox Church"
date: 2021-02-16
image:
---
In this essay I would like to examine Western primarily Augustinian soteriology  and compare it to the Eastern Patristic understanding of soteriology.

The most influential scholastic theologians of soteriology in the West are Anselm of Canterbury (1033 to 1109) and Thomas Aquinas (1225-1274), both who like most of the Western Church (Catholics and Protestants alike) take great influence from Saint Augustine (whether they realize it or not). These two Latin theologians are the progenitors of the two major forms of substitutionary atonement in the West; satisfaction theory and penal substitution theory. They are difficult to distinguish. Satisfaction theory proposes that God’s honor which was tarnished by sin was satisfied by Christ's death on the Cross. Penal substitution is the later development by John Calvin that only God can repay the debt that is owed to God for the fall of man, therefore Christ had to die for us as penalty for sin. To the Early Church these theories propose a foreign idea of God as being **wrathful**. Christ's death was indeed necessary to man's salvation, but the Western Churches (Latin and their Reformed offspring) continued to build doctrine on a doctrine the Eastern Church only considered a part of the picture of man's salvation.

In the East, Church Fathers such as Gregory of Nyssa and Origen do speak of Christ being a ransom, and even St. Basil's liturgy speaks of "Christ being a ransom unto death." This is where the patristic ransom theory of salvation originates, the basis for substitution theory of atonement.  

“In order to secure that the ransom in our behalf might be easily accepted by [Satan] who required it, Deity was hidden under the veil of our nature, that so, as with ravenous fish, the hook of the Deity might be gulped down along with the bait of flesh, and thus, life being introduced into the house of death, and light shining in darkness, that which is diametrically opposed to light and life might vanish; for it is not in the nature of darkness to remain when light is present, or of death to exist when life is active. -St. Gregory of Nyssa (The Great Catechism, 24)".
Even Blessed Augustine speaks of Christ in such terms of payments to a debtor. However, there is controversy as to WHO the ransom is paid to. Theologians such as Gregory of Nazanius object to the idea that the ransom was paid to Satan.
"The Redeemer came and the deceiver was overcome. What did our Redeemer do to our Captor? In payment for us He set the trap, His Cross, with His blood for bait. He [Satan] could indeed shed that blood; but he deserved not to drink it. By shedding the blood of One who was not his debtor, he was forced to release his debtors" (Serm. cxxx, part 2).
Despite this patristic precedence, there are multiple theories of salvation present in their works, including those of ransom, but more importantly of recapitulation. Thus, I propose that ransom theory is not necessarily opposed to recapitulation, but can be complementary.
Beginning with the onset of Western scholasticism (1100s) there was a shift in priority that the Western Church began to place on the figure of Jesus, and the message of the Gospel. In the life of Christ there were three key moments: the Incarnation, the Crucifixion, and the Resurrection. Each could not have happened without the prior (with the exception of the Incarnation). In order for the Crucifixion to happen, Christ had to have been Incarnate, and in order for the Resurrection to happen the Crucifixion had to have happened. What the Western Churches seem to have fixated on was the Crucifixion, at the expense of the miracle of the Incarnation and the Resurrection.
How does this change in gravity affect how we understand salvation? And how does a difference in understanding change the way we live?
The satisfaction theory of atonement is most associated with Anselm of Canterbury, and co-Doctor of the Roman Catholic Church, Thomas of Aquinas. Anselm sees man having a "debt of honor" to God, which is payed by Christ' act of obedience to death. Due to the debt, there is a moral imbalance in the universe that can only be satisfied by the sacrifice of a being of infinite goodness, namely Christ the God-man. So the ransom is paid not to Satan, but to God the Father. Following Anselm, Aquinas uses similar language and tone "Christ bore a satisfactory punishment, not for His, but for our sins.", and this solves two problems; namely, the problem of past sin, and the solution to future sins. Though Christ was punished for the sins of mankind at a historic point in time, by his passion and death Christ  forgives future sins as well, articulating the formal beginnings of the idea of the superabundance of merit (basis for the Treasury of Merit and Indulgences, which the Church can dispense). According to Aquinas, one is saved by drawing on upon Christ' merit (grace through his passion and death) via the sacraments of the church.
This sounds very familiar to penal substitution, but differs in that there is a focus on God being satisfied in the obedience of Christ, rather than satisfied in punishing Christ to enact divine justice. In practice the Catholics have an almost opposite reaction to the Crucifixion than the Protestants do because there is almost an unstated notion that he who sins must give reparations to God. We see this most visibly in the monastic practices, and through the sacrament of penances that requires the penitent to "make reparations and do works of reparation" (Catechism of the Catholic Church on Reconciliation). There is much to say about self-flagellation, but it is particular to Catholic monasteries and convents but unknown to monasteries of the Eastern Churches, the historic heart of monastic life in Christendom. Nowhere would you find any mention of flagellation  by the Desert Fathers, or Anthony the Great because the monastic tradition and Church Tradition in general did not hold the view that self punishment could act as reparation to God, or even one that it was beneficial. In addition, Confession in the Catholic practice is a very "penal" in the sense that works one does after confession is almost punishing in nature. One often goes into Confession with a list of one's sins, and for every sin there is an associated form of punishment, typically in the form of a number of Hail Marys. This falls in line with the idea that one should not only be repentant but also be further punished for sinning.

Like the substitutionary theory of atonement, the penal substitution theory of atonement carries with it a fixation on the Crucifixion and is responsible for Protestant emphasis on "once saved, always saved" and their insistence that salvation is not a process but one that is a singular moment in time (a profession of faith in Christ). It has its roots in Anselm’s Satisfaction theory, but has inklings across Church Fathers (as noted above), not fully being fleshed out until the Reformers and especially Calvin during the Reformation. Salvation is seen as a legal exchange (fitting as Calvin was trained in criminal law) where man stands guilty before God due to his sin, and in order for God to forgive mankind which is condemned someone has to bear the punishment of sin, namely Christ. Jesus died on the Cross as a substitute for sinners, bearing the wrath of God, therefore the condition has been met so mankind can avoid hellfire and God's wrath. Since that condition of SACRIFICE has already been met when Christ died, the work TRULY has been finished, and the only thing left to do is to believe in Christ.

I believe that this inadvertently leads to what many would call license (not all Protestants in terms of their behavior, but many denominations are openly changing the definition of sin if not discounting the seriousness of it). The idea is that if Christ died for me, and I believe in his life and works then whether or not I sin, I am covered because the promise of the Kingdom of Heaven is unconditional to those that believe. To those that hold this view of the elect, Christianity is a way to avoid hell, as well as a guaranteed ticket into Heaven. Besides the call to evangelize to as many people as possible, there is a general lack of urgency, and a willingness to turn a blind eye to sin, or to discount it as something already "insured" by Christ' death. There is no mystery of salvation. All that is left a simple binary of saved and not saved, just as the theory proposes the yes or no question "Was God's wrath satisfied?". If Catholics veer on the extreme end of severity, then Protestants are on the other end of license. Of course, this does not describe actual adherents to either faith, especially in the modern era where there is rampant factionalism (conservative/liberal wings) in both faiths. It is rather a general analysis of the spirit of the doctrine, and what it could lead to in modern and historical practices and attitudes.

The East does not deny the truth of the necessity of atonement in man's salvation, but is bold and joyous in proclaiming that beyond the miracle Passion of Christ, there is the miracle of the Incarnation and the Resurrection.The Church Fathers took for granted that salvation meant avoiding hell but held lofty aspirations for man entering the Kingdom of Heaven even on this Earth, for truly the "Kingdom of Heaven is within you". The Church establishes the safety net of man in Christ but encourages the believer to ascend, as Christ did, to conquer death and sin as Christ did. The true mission of a Christian is not to avoid hell, but to deified by participating in God's energies, through prayer, fasting, and the Eucharist. This Patristic and Eastern theory of salvation has a formal name of the recapitulation theory of salvation, and theosis (divinization) is derived from it. It does not contradict atonement theories of salvation, but while affirming it redirects your attention to something of even greater value.

The first Ecumenical councils dealt heavily with the nature of Christ, of his Incarnation primarily. This was because of the Early Church' understanding that proper Christology was key to understanding how it was that man is saved by God. For example, Christ had to be fully man and fully God in order to save us. If he were a mere man, he could not have saved us for only God can save. More importantly, if He were God, but not man he could not deify man's fallen nature (via hypostatic union), and could not restore man to what Adam once was, sinless and  immortal. By participation in man's nature through the condescension of the Logos into the flesh, only then could God heal man's nature that was sinful due to the fall. This priority was intentional, for it points to the third part of Christ' life.

The Resurrection (and Ascension) of Christ is a statement of victory over death, of the glorification of the flesh even to the point of triumphing over death, of ascending, in soul, spirit and body into heaven. No longer is man's nature corrupted, but restored to Adam's nature before the Fall, but even this pales in comparison to the new nature that Christ the God-man calls us all to partake in. The vessel that was once dead can now house the Holy Spirit and can honor and fulfill the image of God by growing in the likeness of God. The disease of sin is cured, by the Healer offering His precious Body and His Blood, so that we can truly commune with God. Thus, man is given a definitive end in this life, to be Christ-like, and a means to that end, Christ Himself.

In conclusion, Christ did indeed come to save us from damnation, but more importantly he came to raise us from the dead, to make us His sons and His co-workers. But we cannot do that without understanding his nature, for it is essential to understand it before partaking in His miraculous body. Christs life, His Incarnation, his Crucifixion, and his Ascension are all a testament to His love towards mankind, loving us to the point that He allows us to be restored to life in Paradise, to commune with God eternally, both in this life through His Body and His Blood in the Eucharist, and in the next in the Second Coming.
